## S3

AWS key-value object storage solution.

#### S3 101

- Object based
- Scalable.
- The data is spread across multiple devices and facilities.
- Objects size can be 0bytes - 5tb.
- Unlimited storage
- After upload you will get at HTTP 200 success code
- Buckets are a universal namespace
- Various storage classes/tiers(must know these for the exam)
- Control access to buckets using bucket ACL(access control lists) or a Bucket Policy

Objects have:
- Key, name
- Value, the data
- Version ID
- Metadata(data about the data that you’re storing)
- Subresources
- ACLs
- Torrent

##### Data consistency

Read after Write consistency for PUTS of new objects(read immediately after writing)
Event consistency for overwrite existing files PUTS and DELETES(can take some time to propagate)

- S3 standard is built for 99.9% guaranteed availability.
- AWS says 99.9999999% durability guaranteed(11x 9s) - if you put an object up, it's very unlikely it will be lost.

##### Tiered storage 

What makes up the cost of S3?
 - Storage
 - Requests and retrieval
 - Data transfer
 - Management & Replication


Tiers:

S3 Standard
- General-purpose for any type of data
- Typically used for frequently accessed data
- 99.99% availability 
- 99.9999999% durability
- Data stored across multiple devices in multiple facilities to sustain the loss of two facilities concurrently.

S3 - IA(infrequently accessed)
- For long-lived Infrequently data but needs millisecond access when required.
- Lower fee the Standard, but you are charged a retrieval fee.

S3 - IA One Zone
- Super low cost
- One AZ
- Good for when you dont require multi-az data resilience.
- For recreatable, infrequently accessed data that needs milliseconds access.

S3 Intelligent Tiering
- Automatic cost savings for data with unknown or changing access patterns

S3 Glacier
- Long term backups and archives. Retrieval option, from 1 -> 12hrs
- Secure, durable, low cost
- Any amount of data can be stored
- Configurable retrieval times

S3 Glacier Deep Archive
- Long term archiving accessed once or twice a year
- Retrieval time of 12hrs


##### Billing

- Storage - the more you store, the greater the bill.
- No. of requests
- Storage management pricing(tiers)
- Data transfer
- Transfer acceleration
- Cross-Region replication

##### Security and Access

- All newly created buckets are PRIVATE.
- You can set up access control using ACLs and Bucket Policies.
- Buckets can be configured to create access logs, with log request made to the bucket. These logs can go to another bucket or another bucket in another account.

##### Encryption

Encryption in transit - browsing using https
- SSL/TLS

Encryption at Rest(Server Side) - encrypt data that is being stored
- S3 Managed Keys SSE-S3(amazon manage keys for you)
- AWS Key Management Service, Managed Keys SSE-KMS(you and amazon manage keys together)
- Server-side Encryption with Customer(you) provided keys SSE-C

Client-Side Encryption

##### Versioning

- S3 allows you to store all versions of an object, including write and the deletion of an object.
- Great backup tool
- Once enabled, it cannot be disabled. Only Suspended.
- Integrates with Lifecycle rules(moving things to Glacier)
- MFA deletion capability, an extra layer of security to stop anyone going in and accidentally/maliciously deleting anything.

##### Lifecycle Management
Automate transferring your objects to different tiers.
- Can be used in conjunction with Versioning(don’t need versioning)
- You can apply lifecycle rules to your objects.
- Rules can apply to current versions of, previous or both
- You can configure expiration rules in a lifecyle rule
- You can permanently delete previous versions after a set amount of days
- You can clean up multipart objects after a set amount of days


##### Cross account access

3 ways to share buckets across accounts
- Using Bucket Policies & IAM(applies across the entire bucket).
Programmatic Access Only.
- Using Bucket ACLs(Access Control List) & IAM (individual objects).
Programmatic Access Only.
- Cross-account IAM Roles. Programmatic AND Console access.

AWS Organizations. Account management service
- Centrally manage accounts
- The more resources you use, the less you pay. Like a subscription service, you get bigger discounts the more you buy.
- Amazon aggregates all account usage when billing, i.e.S3 usage from qa, prod, i18n prod etc all added together. This can make unit of pay cheaper.
This means you get the best price possible.
- Service control policies(SCPs) are used, like IAM, to control access levels for accounts

Best practice with AWS Organizations & exam tips:
- Always enable MFS on the root account
- Always use strong and complex passwords on the root account
- Paying account should be used only for billing.
- Enable/Disable AWS services using Service Control Policies(SCPS) on Organization Units(OUs) or on individual accounts

Things to remember around consolidated billing advantages:
- One bill per AWS account
- Very easy to track charges and allocate costs
- Volume pricing discount

##### Cross-Region Replication

Cross-Region replication enables automatic and asynchronous copying of objects across buckets in different AWS Regions. Buckets configured for object replication can be owned by the same AWS account or by different accounts.

- Requires Versioning to be enabled on the source and destination buckets.
- Requires an IAM role.
- You can configure the rule to move to an existing or new bucket.
- The destination bucket you move can have a different tier, i.e. Glacier, for a backup copy that is infrequently accessed.
- If you replicate a bucket this way - the new bucket will have the same access level, i.e. public/not public
- When you set up cross-region replication, AWS DOES NOT replicate existing objects to the destination bucket - you would have to move those across manually. All subsequent object will be replication automatically.
- DELETES don’t get replicated. If an object OR version gets deleted from the source bucket, that deletion is not reflected in the destination bucket


##### Transfer Acceleration

It utilizes CloudFront Edge Network to accelerate uploads to S3. Instead of uploading directly to your S3 bucket, you can use a distinct URL to upload directly to an edge location which will then transfer that file to S3. You will get a distinct URL to upload to.

High level - User uploads a file to an edge location, amazon uses its backbone network to upload from the edge location to then load directly to your S3 bucket.
- Speed test can be found here(takes 5 mins ish) and will tell you how much quicker it is to upload to an edge location vs directly to S3

##### Snowball

A petabyte-scale data transpor solution that used secure appliances to transfer large amounts on data onto it and out of AWS.

Using Snowball addresses common challenges with large-scale data transfers including high network costs, long transfer times, and security concerns.
- Transferring data with Snowball is simple, fast, secure, and can be as little as one-fifth the cost of high speed internet.
- 50TB or 80TB
- Multple layers of security
- Snowball Edge 100TB
- Snowmobile Exabyte-scale data transfer(literally a truck)

Snowball exam tips, Snowball can:
- Import to S3
- Export from S3
- If a scenario comes up about moving huge amounts of data into the cloud, Snowball is an option

##### Storage Gateway

A service that connects an on-premise software appliance with cloud-based storage to provide seamless and secure integration between an organization on-premise IT environment and AWS’s storage infrastructure. The service enables you to securely store data to the AWS cloud for scalable and cost-effective storage.

SG(storage gateway) software appliance is available for downloads a virtual machine(VM) image that you install on a host in your datacenter. Storage Gateway supports wither VMware ESXi or Microsoft Hyper-V. Once you’ve installed your gateway and you’ve associated it with your AWS account through the activation process, you can use the AWS management console to crate the storage option that is right for you.


Three different types of Storage Gateway:

- File Gateway(NFS & SMB)

Files stored as objects in your S3 buckets accessed through a Network File System(NFS) mount point. Ownership, permissions, and timestamps are durably stored in S3 in the user-metadata of the object associated with the file. Once objects are transferred to S3, they can be managed as native S3 objects, and bucket policies such as versioning, lifecycle management, and cross-region replication apply directly to objects stored in your bucket.

- Tape gateway
Durable; cost-effective solution to archive your data in the AWS cloud. The VTL interface it provides lets you leverage your existing tape-based backup app infra to store data on virtual tape cartridges that you create on your tape gateway.

- Volume Gateway(iSCSI) stored volumes

The volume interface presents your applications with disk volumes using the iSCSI block protocol(virtual hard disc).
Data written to these volumes can be asynchronously backed up as point-in-time snapshots of your volumes, and stored in the cloud as Amazon EBS snapshots.

Snapshots are incremental backups that capture only changed blocks. All snapshot storage is also compressed to minimize your storage charges.

Stored volumes let you store your primary data locally, while asynchronous backing that data to AWS. 

Stored volumes provide your on-premise applications with low-latency access to their entire datasets while providing durable, off-site backups.

Cached volumes
- You can use AWS S3 as your primary data storage while retaining frequent;y accessed data locally in your storage gateway. Cached volumes minimize the need to scale your on=premise storage infrastructure, whilst still providing your applications with low-latency access to there frequently accessed data.

Storage vs Cached
- Storage is for the entire data set, Cached is for frequently accessed data.

Exam tips for Storage Gateway:
- File Gateway - For flat files, stores on S3
- Volume Gateway
- Stored Volumes. The entire dataset is stored on-site and is asynchronously backed up to S3.
- Cached Volumes. Entire Dataset is stored on S3 and the most frequently accessed data is cached on site.
- Gateway Virtual Tape Library

##### Athena

Interactive query service which enables you to analyse and query data located in S3 using standard SQL.

- Serverless. Nothing to provision
- Pay per query / per TB scanned
- No need to set up complex Extract/Transform/Load ETL processes(how you get your data out of S3)
- Works directly with data stored in S3.
- Where would you use this? To query log files in S3. Generate business reports, payroll data for example.

##### Macie

Security service that used Machine learning and NLP(Natural Language Processing) to discover, classify and protect sensitive data stored in S3.

- Uses AI to find PII in S3 objects
- Includes dashboards, reports and alerting
- Works directly with S3 data
- Can also analyse CloudTrail logs
- Great for PCI-DSS and preventing ID theft

#### S3 summary

- Object based storage
- Files can be from 0 Bytes to 5 TB
- There is unlimited storage
- S3 is a universal namespace. Names must be unique
- Not suitable to install an operating system or database on
- Successful uploads will generate a HTTP 200 status code
- Default - all newly created buckets are private
* Bucket policies
- Bucket wide - not like ACLs
* Access Control Lists(ACL)
- Fine grained rules
- Can go down to individual object level

- Can be configured to access logs, logs of all requests to Bucket_A can be sent to another bucket Bucket_B. Bucket_B can be in another bucket, in another account.
- Read after Writes consistency for PUTS of new Objects. If you put an object into S3, you can read it immediately
- Eventual Consistency for overwrite PUTS and DELETES(can take some time to propagate)Overwriting a file, then read that new file immediately could mean that the new file isn’t ready yet. It will be, eventually… Same for deleted objects.
* Encryption in transit is achieved by SSL/TLS
* Encryption at Rest(server-side) is achieved by 
- S3 managed keys - sse-s3 or AWS KMS - amazon managed
- Server-side encryption with customer-provided keys sse-c
- Client-Side Encryption

* 3 different ways to share S3 buckets across accounts
- Bucket Policies & IAM(applies to the entire bucket. Programmatic Access Only
- Bucket ACLs & IAM(individual object level). Programmatic Access Only
- Cross-account IAM roles. Programmatic AND Console access.

Cross-Region Replication
- Versioning must be enabled on source and destination buckets.
- Files in an existing bucket are not replicated automatically.
- All subsequently updated files are replicated automatically
- Delete markers are not replicated
- Deleting individual versions or delete markers will not be replicated.
- Understand what Cross-Region Replication is at a high level

Lifecycle policies
- Automates moving your objects between the different storage tiers
- Can be used in conjunction with versions
- Can be applied to current and previous versions
- Rules based

Transfer acceleration
- Upload to edge, moved across AWS backbone network

Snowball
- A big disc that holds your data whilst you move it around
- Can import into S3
- Export from S3

Storage Gateway
File Gateway
- Flat files, stored directly on S3
Volume gateway
- Stored Volumes. Entire Dataset is stored on-site and is asynchronously back up to S3
- Cached Volumes. Entire Dataset on S3, only frequently accessed data is cached on site
Gateway Virtual Tape Library
- Used for backup and uses popular backup applications like NetBackup, Backup Exec, VEEAM etc.
Athena
- Query service
- Serverless
- Query S3 data using SQL
- Commonly used to analyse log data in S3
Macie
- AI and NLP service
- Helps to identify PII for data in S3
- Can be used to analyse CLoudTrail logs for suspicious activity
- Includes dashboards, reports and alerting
- Great for PCI-DSS compliance and preventing ID theft

Things to remember for the exam:

- S3 HTTP codes
- S3 object storage and consistency models
- S3 storage tiers and replication
- S3 RRS, you might see questions on it. It’s now One Zone IA
- S3 Encryption/Key storage models
- Snowball: When it’s appropriate to use
